Doc: Upload the tutorial of enable AGL as UOS in ACRN (#1968)
projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor: doc/tutorials/using_agl_as_uos.rst

.. _using_agl_as_uos:

Using AGL as the User OS
########################

This tutorial describes the steps to run Automotive Grade Linux (AGL) 

> as the User OS on ACRN hypervisor and the problems we got at current stage. 

Reviewer: This is clearly a work in progress document that does not have a happy ending (yet). Will the issues mentioned here be resolved any time soon?  I would think a tutorial document would show how to do something successfully.  @hwang37 Let me know if I should edit this for publishing in its current state.

Reviewer 2: I'm fine to publish it now without a happy ending.
The reason is that the bug is in AGL side and we need AGL community to patch and fix in AGL repo, out of ACRN project's scope.
Shouldn't we leave some improvement room to AGL community? :)

We hope the steps documented in this article could help us to reproduce the 
problem much easier and provide some information for further debugging.

.. image:: images/The-overview-of-AGL-as-UOS.png
   :align: center

Introduction of AGL
*******************

Automotive Grade Linux (AGL) is an open source project of The Linux Foundation 
that is building a Linux-based, open software platform for automotive application.
For more information about AGL, please visit AGL’s official website:
https://www.automotivelinux.org/.

Steps for using AGL as the UOS
******************************

#. Hardware preparation

   The regulatory model of NUC we used is `NUC6CAYH 
   <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/boards-kits/nuc/kits/nuc6cayh.html>`_
   and this kind of NUC has two display ports: 1x HDMI and 1x VGA.
   So two displays needed for NUC, one for SOS and one for UOS, 
   and connect these two displays to NUC.

#. Prepare the Service OS (SOS)

   Follow the instructions found in the Getting started guide for Intel NUC 
   to setup SOS :ref:`getting-started-apl-nuc`.

> #. Prepare the User OS (UOS)

Reviewer 3: What surprises me in this section is that you do not install the kernel-iot-lts2018 kernel modules in the AGL image/rootfs. Shouldn't we do this?

   These are the couple of lines you need to modify
    
   .. code-block:: none 
   
      -s 3,virtio-blk,/root/agl-demo-platform-crosssdk-intel-corei7-64.wic \
      -k /usr/lib/kernel/default-iot-lts2018 \
      -B "root=/dev/vda2 ...
     
   .. note::
      In case you have downloaded a different AGL image or store the image in other directory, 
      you will need to modify the AGL file name or directory (the ``-s 3,virtio-blk`` argument) 
      to match what you have downloaded above. 
      Likewise, you may need to adjust the kernel file name to ``default-iot-lts2018``.
      
#. Start the User OS (UOS)
    
   .. code-block:: none   

      $ sudo /usr/share/acrn/samples/nuc/launch_uos.sh
       
   **Congratulations**, you are now watching the User OS booting up!

   And you should be able to see the console of AGL:

   .. image:: images/The-console-of-AGL.png
      :align: center
      
   When you see the output of the console above, that means AGL has been loaded 
   and now you could operate on the console. 

Enable the display of AGL
*************************

But following the setup steps before, you will get black screen in AGL. 

> Please don't worry about it, and we will give the solutions to the black screen issue in AGL.

Reviewer: OK, if you don't want to delete this sentence, then change it to:
```
We provide a workaround for this black screen in the steps below.
```

By debugging, we identified the problem as an issue of ``ivi-shell.so`` library, it seems that 
this library is not well supported. But we can light the screen with the GUI of weston like figure below.

.. image:: images/The-GUI-of-weston.png
   :align: center
   
To enable weston in AGL, We need to modify ``weston.ini``, which is the configuration file of weston.

.. code-block:: none
   
   $ vim /etc/xdg/weston/weston.ini
   

> The changes of ``weston.ini``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make these changes to ``weston.ini``:
```

#. Comment ``ivi-shell.so`` out

#. Check the name of output is ``HDMI-A-2``

> After that, there are still some steps need to do to launch weston in AGL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, set up an environment variable and restart the weston service:
```

.. code-block:: none

   $ export XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/run/platform/display
   $ systemctl restart weston

> And you will be able to see the GUI of weston in AGL now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now see the weston GUI in AGL.
```

Follow up
*********

> ACRN Hypervisor is trying to support more kinds of operating systems all the time, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ACRN Hypervisor is expanding support for more operating systems, 
```

> and AGL is an example of them. We are still debugging the “ivi-shell.so” issue, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and AGL is an example of this effort. We continue to debug the ``ivi-shell.so`` issue, 
```

> and we are also investigating the problem why AGL GUI not got launched, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and investigating why the AGL GUI is not launching as expected. 
```

> currently it may either be a configuration issue or a real bug, more experiment will be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

*******************

Automotive Grade Linux is a collaborative open source project that is 
bringing together automakers, suppliers and technology companies to 
accelerate the development and adoption of a fully open software stack 
for the connected car. With Linux at its core, AGL is developing an open 
platform from the ground up that can serve as the de facto industry 
standard to enable rapid development of new features and technologies.
For more information about AGL, please visit AGL’s official website:
https://www.automotivelinux.org/.

Steps for using AGL as the UOS
******************************

#. Download the release of AGL from https://download.automotivelinux.org/AGL/release/eel/, 
   and we will use ``eel_5.1.0`` release for example.
    
   .. code-block:: none 
   
      $ cd ~
      $ wget https://download.automotivelinux.org/AGL/release/eel/5.1.0/intel-corei7-64/deploy/images/intel-corei7-64/agl-demo-platform-crosssdk-intel-corei7-64.wic.xz
      $ unxz agl-demo-platform-crosssdk-intel-corei7-64.wic.xz      

#. Download the "kernel-iot-lts2018" kernel:

   .. code-block:: none
  
      $ sudo mkdir ~/uos-kernel-build
      $ cd ~/uos-kernel-build

>       $ wget https://download.clearlinux.org/releases/current/clear/x86_64/os/Packages/linux-iot-lts2018-4.19.0-27.x86_64.rpm

Reviewer 3: This will *very soon* be broken (as soon as `current` moves on to the next build version)... so I suggest replacing this with a fixed URL.:

```suggestion
      $ wget https://download.clearlinux.org/releases/26700/clear/x86_64/os/Packages/linux-iot-lts2018-4.19.0-27.x86_64.rpm
```

      $ rpm2cpio linux-iot-lts2018-4.19.0-27.x86_64.rpm | cpio -idmv
   
   .. note::

>       Here we download the kernel from ``current`` Clear Linux version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      Here we download the ``iot-lts2018`` kernel from Clear Linux version 26700. Alternatively, you can use the most up-to-date kernel by downloading it from the https://download.clearlinux.org/releases/current/clear/x86_64/os/Packages/ URL.
```

      
#. Deploy the UOS kernel modules to UOS virtual disk image 

>    (note: you’ll need to use the same iot-lts2018 image version number noted in step 2 above):

Reviewer 3: Can you turn that into a proper ``.. note::`` directive?

   These are the couple of lines you need to modify:
    
   .. code-block:: none 
   
      -s 3,virtio-blk,/root/agl-demo-platform-crosssdk-intel-corei7-64.wic \
      -k /usr/lib/kernel/default-iot-lts2018 \
      -B "root=/dev/vda2 ...
     
   .. note::
      In case you have downloaded a different AGL image or store the image in other directory, 
      you will need to modify the AGL file name or directory (the ``-s 3,virtio-blk`` argument) 
      to match what you have downloaded above. 
      Likewise, you may need to adjust the kernel file name to ``default-iot-lts2018``.
      
#. Start the User OS (UOS):
    
   .. code-block:: none   

      $ sudo /usr/share/acrn/samples/nuc/launch_uos.sh
       
   **Congratulations**, you are now watching the User OS booting up!

   And you should be able to see the console of AGL:

   .. image:: images/The-console-of-AGL.png
      :align: center
      
   When you see the output of the console above, that means AGL has been loaded 
   and now you could operate on the console. 

Enable the display of AGL
*************************

> But following the setup steps before, you will get black screen in AGL. 

Author: I will try with the configurations to build the kernel for AGL, thanks a lot!
